We'll roll tape here for a second.
Darrell, I'm gonna be throwing you a signal tape delayed so you can check what it sounds
like on the tape.
Okay, you're now tape delayed.
What's the sound like?
Yeah.
Okay, now you should just be getting one voice.
Okay, hold on.
Okay, now you should be getting one voice.
Still two voices?
Oh, I don't know what it is.
Just hang on.
Okay, now you're getting one voice.
Okay.
Uh, Joe says hello to Darrell.
Hello, Darrell.
Are you in here?
No, I'm in here.
Uh, what's the sound like, Darrell?
Sounds good.
Okay.
Okay, switching back to standard.
Alrighty.
Um, we're ready to go on this, Ann.
Are you set on that end?
Yeah.
Okay.
Um, a lot of, I read The Forward in Study War No More again last night.
So some of this stuff is things you've already talked about and other things.
But some of our, a lot of people listen to the show probably.
If they read books, they all read Forge.
Yeah.
Okay.
Um, this is my first question.
Oh, yeah.
Uh, some of the questions will not be exactly a question.
I'll just make a statement and then you can respond to it.
Fine.
Like this first one.
Um, it's, your writing, uh, started out as a hobby, uh, that developed into a profession, didn't it?
Well, yeah, although the development is fairly rampant, uh, I always wrote ever since I was, oh, in second or third grade.
I wrote a lot of poetry.
And, uh, well, when I was, uh, senior in college my last semester, I took a creative writing course.
So I was in physics and astronomy, but I wanted to take something easy to fill out my 18 hours or so.
And I wrote two science fiction stories.
And, uh, eventually I sold both of them.
I was drafted.
And then when I came back from Vietnam, they give you 30 days leave and I just re-typed the stories then and sent them out.
And one of them sold before I was out of the army.
Then I don't know, I just, uh, I never thought you could make very much money at it, but I sort of, sort of, a source of dear money.
And, uh, when I decided to drop out of graduate school and try a semester of writing full time, I sold my first novel about,
a couple of days after I dropped out.
So I never went back.
That would tend to kind of cement things.
Yeah.
So it's a, it's funny, coincidence has a lot to do with it.
There's an awful lot of luck in not getting started writing.
Yeah.
Uh, your first works, uh, had to do with war.
Uh, you were in Vietnam and that must have had a significant impact on you.
Oh yeah, well, it's, uh, of course it's the most true thing.
The dramatic thing has ever happened to me, so it's the most obvious, uh, fuel for my fiction.
Although I don't want to be typed as a writer about war, I have written two novels and edited one at the Alchemy about it.
Yeah.
The old adage to write what you know, and of the things I know that's the one that's most, uh, universally interesting.
Okay.
Yeah.
A couple of the following questions have to do with, with, with, uh, war and some of the themes you have in some of your books and stories.
Okay.
Here they come.
Uh, and infinite dreams, which is a collection of stories you published, uh, in various publications since about 1972, um, war and, uh, violence linked with the war.
And with a change in mankind's behavior seem to be recurrent themes in some of these stories.
Um, are you saying that sometimes man has to face violent conflicts in order to change his behavior?
Well, I don't think I'm coming out and saying it that directly.
I think it's obvious that, uh, confronting death on a daily basis changes people.
Sometimes, uh, radically for the worse, and that people are totally dehumanized by war.
Uh, but speaking racially, I don't think you could make such a broad statement.
Uh, what's behind some of the things I'm writing is the hope that human nature eventually may improve to the point where we won't have wars.
Find other ways to settle our differences.
Yeah.
Let me skip up that.
Got another question that has to deal with that. Let me find it here.
Yeah.
Well, while Dave is trying to find his question that he just wrote down about half an hour ago.
Maybe I missed that one when I was transcribing it to typewritten material.
Yeah. Well, actually, uh, being in the army was, uh, had an important effect on my writing, aside from war, because, uh, I met a whole new class of people.
That is all of my friends while I was growing up, and tended to be a white middle class, upper middle class kids.
And there were successors, white middle class, upper class, uh, scientists, so forth.
And it was, uh, just a mundane revelation to find that people who came from different backgrounds still had an awful lot in common with me.
Most of the guys in my combat outfit were urban black high school or junior high school dropouts.
Yeah.
You got along quite well.
Yeah. I found the question.
In both your novels, Mindbridge and Forever War, you have mankind united in the face of a crisis with an alien race.
Do you think that we'll ever be able to progress without this sort of conflict spurring it on?
I wonder whether, well, of course, it's a simplification, uh, and it's an old, uh, theme in science fiction.
That is everybody getting together because the Martians are after us.
Uh, I wish I could say that I thought that we would be able to do this in the face of a less dramatic uniform enemy that is obviously the threats,
combined threats of overpopulation and dwindling resources and industrial pollution.
Are as threatening as either of the enemies in those two novels, but we can't make a coherent face against this enemy and fight it.
Um, it's just a, it's a way of making specific, sort of a real, but diffuse nightmare.
Yeah. And, uh, in some of your stories that do deal with war and conflict, um, on a personal level, uh, where, uh, like in, uh, there's a story where a man is,
um, hit by a laser mine and his, uh, his leg is, is, uh, cut off and he's hurt, uh, he's hurt personally.
Um, does that relate to something in your own experiences?
Well, yeah, I was wounded pretty severely in Vietnam. I was hospitalized for six months.
Uh, and it was a booby trap. I didn't set it off. Somebody else did, but it was a pretty big one.
I had over 200 separate wounds, but managed to come out of it all right after a few months of physical therapy.
So it's, uh, yeah, I draw on that experience. The one, the one you're talking about is the mind of his own.
But I think I've got other, uh, short stories like the private war of private Jacob that draw on that memory.
Yeah. Are you exercising demons?
Pardon?
Are you exercising some demons?
I don't, uh, I don't know whether I am or not. Uh, I think I'm just using available material.
If the, uh, I don't think the demon is too easily exercised by fiction.
That's a, uh, a truism that I don't think is always true.
Yeah. Uh, in your first novel, Forever War, um, it's a, uh, novel that deals with, uh, war on anergalactic or, anergalactic level.
Um, is it, uh, it's similar in some respects to Heinlein's Starship Troopers.
Uh, did you intentionally write it as sort of an answer to that or has it just come about, did the work ended up that way?
Well, there was no rough intention on my part.
Uh, in fact, I didn't realize until I was about 70 or 80 pages into the book that many of the details were similar to Starship Troopers.
Somebody else pointed that out when he read the manuscript.
I wasn't, uh, doing an answer to Heinlein's book. I thought Heinlein's book was admirable in many ways, even though we have, uh, diametrically opposed philosophies.
But the, uh, I know it was, if it, if there's any relation to any book, it is to my own first novel, War Year, because it's, uh, an expansion into a science fiction universe of the notions that I was trying to express in, uh, mainstream novel.
Yeah, that was...
Yeah, I've heard he's a very interesting man.
Yeah.
Um, also, uh, in For Ever War, you deal with, uh, time compression on the Starships. They travel off the battle at speeds near to that of light, and then when they return, hundreds of years have passed on the Earth.
That's hard science.
Yeah.
Uh, many writers are, you know, if they're considered hard science or soft science, and some mix the two styles together.
Um, what part does hard science play in your writing?
Well, I try to use it to make the worlds that are in the event more believable.
Uh, at least to me, since I do have a background in science and engineering, I think, uh...
Well, the writer has to at least suspend his own disbelief while he's making up these stories, and it's easier for me to do it if it's on a fairly solid scientific foundation.
Even though my science is rather old-fashioned and probably rather sloppy by, uh, my real scientist's standards, it's still enough to convince me, so it's fulfilled its function.
Yeah.
The, uh, for instance, the... it goes deeper than just description, the, uh, time dilation in, uh, the forever war.
So it's scientifically accurate. Its main function is metaphorical, and that is to demonstrate how the soldiers who fight a war become isolated from the culture that they're supposed to be protecting.
It's using a science-fictional device to exaggerate something that, uh, happens to every soldier.
Yeah, and then that, when these soldiers leave and come back, uh, the world they left isn't even the same world once they get back to it.
Right. Which is quite true.
I remember when I came back from Vietnam, I was suddenly plunged into what was an alien culture, even though I'd only been a soldier for two years.
A lot of things had changed, and, you know, it's not, uh, not a great thing to come back. There were no victory parades, and that sort of thing.
Yeah. I can empathize with that.
Yeah.
Um, the conflicts aside, um, Forever War and Mind Bridge have optimistic endings, but, uh, in your novel, All My Sins Remembered, was that put together from a series of short stories?
Uh, about half of it appeared as two novelettes, you know.
Yeah. But in the end of it, uh, the protagonist is just literally turned off and, uh, and killed at the end of it. It's a, it's a rather pessimistic ending.
Well, it was, uh, it was planned all along that way. The story is about a bureaucracy that totally takes over a man's identity, and he doesn't really exist except as a tool for that bureaucracy.
When it becomes an efficient tool, he's scrapped.
Yeah. He's, uh, programmed to go out and do certain, I guess what you'd call, covert operations.
Yeah.
And, uh, he goes more or less against his will, that is to say, through very advanced techniques of conditioning, he's turned into a thoroughly different person.
He was a Buddhist, uh, a pacifist when he started out. He did not get the job he signed up for. They twisted him around into a killing machine.
And at the end of it, he, uh, what, rebelled against that?
Yeah, fine.
Man, he was no longer suited their purpose and then they got rid of him.
Right.
Yeah. Um, uh, jumping up to Mindbridge, um, it's dedicated to your teachers at the Iowa Writers Workshop.
And the, the style of the novel is, is unusual. Is there a connection with that?
Oh, not really. The connection is with John Dos Ponses. Thanks.
Uh, I read the USH reality some years before at Broke Mindbridge and really was impressed by the way it worked and thought it worked really well in science fiction.
So I tried it out in a rather long short story, to Howard Hughes, an Autism Proposal.
And it looked like it would work. So I went ahead and applied it to Mindbridge.
And it's, the, uh, I did do most of that book while I was studying at Iowa and that's why it was a dedication.
Yeah, you also used, used a lot of some humor in, uh, to Howard Hughes and Modest Proposal.
Um, do you find that a, a useful tool to get across your message?
Yeah. I think sarcasm is the operative word.
Yeah, I think even in a deadly serious book there has to be some leavening of humor.
A lot of science fiction is just too, uh, somber and full of message.
I think my primary function is to be an entertainer.
Humor is part of that.
Um, also noticed in the dedication, a lot of the authors at the workshop were mainstream authors.
Yeah.
Uh, did they, uh, what was their reaction to, to science fiction?
Well, they were a little apprehensive about it. See, they didn't know I was a science fiction writer when I joined the workshop.
So I joined on the basis of my first novel, which was not science fiction.
And it was, uh, some of them were outwardly hostile towards science fiction, such as Stanley Elkham.
Others were anywhere between apprehensive and slightly sympathetic.
Stephen Becker, one of them had actually had a few pieces in the magazine Fantasy and Science Fiction.
In general, though, they, uh, thinly disguised attitude that, uh, this stuff was just commercial fiction.
Or beneath contempt.
But, uh, they couldn't ignore the fact that I was making more money than most of them were with my science fiction.
And that, uh, might have been a cause of tension in some cases.
Yeah, that's a point that's kind of hard to argue with.
Yeah.
That attitude is, is one I've never really been able to understand because some of our greatest novels are science fiction novels.
Well, that's true.
But the, uh, the field is judged by its worst, not by its best.
And people like that, uh, think of science fiction, they think in terms of great D movies and, uh, Lazy Television.
They don't, they've never read much of the best of the field.
Pity.
That's true.
Um, uh, back again to Mindbridge, um, uh, a specific question about it.
The alien race that created the Mindbridge, uh, you suggest they commit racial suicide.
Uh, why do you think a supposedly advanced race would do something like that?
I don't know.
So, I was feeling well, they lived for millions or hundreds of millions or even billions of years, thoroughly, individually immortal.
And it just wasn't anything else that they hadn't done, except die.
But I just, uh, that sort of throw away, there's, uh, I didn't put any deep thought into why they should do that.
I just wanted the image of, uh, the, uh, light from their passing, fighting up the nights of Earth's fault. Humans were just behind their fault.
Yeah, they, uh, they supernovaed their star.
Yeah.
The signature stoop, uh, remains of their civilization.
Yeah. Um, I may be wrong here and then this next question, so correct me if I am.
Um, in Tri Centennial, uh, when the starship returns to Earth, all of the humans are gone.
Yeah, it never returns, actually.
It doesn't return.
Okay.
That's a shift in viewpoint.
Oh, okay. Uh, what happened to the humans on the Earth?
Some sort of a war.
I assume.
Okay.
The, uh, it doesn't say anything except that there's no life left on Earth and it looks pretty much like an ecological zero.
It's just, uh, a void.
And my other question about Tri Centennial is who were the beings in the glass and metal tubes?
Well, those are the leftovers, the people who were on the L5 type colony.
They're still there. Their society is a closed cycle, agriculture society.
And there's no reason that they, uh, would have to die when the Earth died.
Uh-huh. Okay. Yeah. Um, in various novels and stories that you've written, you've created some excellent aliens.
How do you go about constructing your aliens?
Not very logically. I, uh, I've been asked that before and it's a hard thing to answer.
I know, uh, for instance, the Lebron in, uh, Mindbridge.
I did have this notion of, uh, aliens who were shape-changers who appeared as angelically beautiful creatures,
but were ferocious killers, uh, mindless killers.
I wanted that image.
But normally, I don't know the, uh, the Sik-Kang and, uh, all my sins are remembered.
I just thought I'd make a big bug that had a Jewish sense of humor.
And that's, so that's all. I just, everything else is decoration.
You sort of close your eyes and see this critter and, uh, type it down.
Um, I have on occasion, uh, looked through books of animal anatomy and just clenched through biology and botany types of books to try to be inspired by natural forms.
But I don't have any algorithm that I know works for making monsters.
Ah. Um, in Mindbridge and Forever War, humanity has greatly changed at the end of both of the books, almost an evolutionary difference.
Do you believe that we will radically have, have radically different natures in the future?
I think it's quite possible, even, uh, say within the span of a century.
So many of the things that determine human nature are things that can be mitigated by technology.
Uh, such as, uh, the problem of, uh, dying so soon.
That is, it's possible to develop in a couple of generations, being to live a century, two centuries, maybe a thousand years,
maybe as long as you care to.
That will radically change human nature because it will take the pressure off, of individuals.
Um, the other or other less so sanguine notions, it's possible that, uh, that sciences and communication will, uh, grow into a kind of sophisticated mind control.
It will be difficult for the individual to know exactly what is his idea and what has been induced by his own society.
Uh, sort of a sophisticated life-long brainwashing doesn't seem too unlikely.
If you can argue that it's happening now.
Similar to what, uh, Corn Booth and Poald did in Space Merchants.
Right.
Space Merchants is a chillingly prophetic novel actually.
They do a lot of things with their heads.
Those of us who stay away from the TV screen art is affected by others, but it is there.
Yeah, um, out of the novels and short stories that you've written, which one did you enjoy writing the most?
I don't know, let me see.
Strangely enough, I think I enjoyed most writing a pseudonymous adventure novel called Antards of a Venge.
Because it was so easy.
Most of my writing was very difficult to do.
And it's just, uh, setting a spy up and letting him knock the bad guys down and win in the end.
It's all very pleasant.
In terms of more serious work, I think Mindbridge was the most fun to write.
I had the most latitude there.
I also enjoyed that the most until this latest one.
What?
Um...
Yeah, I read Antard the Merman.
Oh, oh, God, I guess it was a couple of years back.
When did you write that?
Oh, I guess about 1971.
Yeah.
I didn't even know it was you.
That one, I got captured by the cover.
Oh yeah, I'm a dicko.
Yeah, but that appeared to be the beginning of a series.
Yes, that's right.
The, uh, idea was I was going to write a three or four, and then somebody else was going to pick it up.
That's why it's not under my name.
It's what they call a house name.
And, uh, I got tired of the damn thing after two.
And I did write a third one and got paid for it, but it was pretty lousy and they didn't print it.
And then the whole series just fizzled away.
I guess they were working on a contemporary enthusiasm over dolphins.
And when that started evaporating, they put the kibosh on the series.
Or maybe they couldn't find anybody to continue it.
Yeah, I would imagine writing a series book like that would be difficult.
Well, the first one's easy.
And in the case of Hector, the second one was pretty easy too.
But I've also done two Star Trek novels, which are sort of series things.
It gets old real fast.
You can't make up things.
You have to be consistent with the canon that you've already established.
And that can get real boring after about 100,000 orders.
Terrific.
Yeah, and the Star Trek material that you've written, you're already...
The framework is already built and you have to build a story around the framework.
Yeah, it's already established.
That was sort of cute though, writing the first one.
I had fun because I've been in service during most of Star Trek.
And so I had to treat it as a research project.
And I would solve the TV show every afternoon and then I'd read all the books
and make charts and things like that and then sat down and wrote the books.
That was an odd thing.
I had to sign a two-book contract.
And whereas I found the first one very interesting and fun to write,
the second one was quite difficult to write.
And the first one took three months and the second took nine.
How did you get approached to write those?
Well, it was just being in the right place at the right time.
In a way, Jim Bliss was doing the series of these things.
And I knew they were quite financially successful.
And when Jim died, I was in correspondence with Fred Pole, who was his editor there.
And I just apologized for being like a vulture circling over the corpse,
but I asked whether anybody was picking up Jim's work.
And he said, why don't you give it a try?
And actually, Jim was taking the scripts from the TV show and just turning them into short stories.
Whereas they wanted me to do what Jim would have done if he had lived,
which was write original novels around the Star Trek characters.
One of the novels was Planet of Destruction.
Excuse me, Planet of Judgment.
Let's see, I read one of them and that was one I had to do where they discovered,
I guess, what would be sort of considered a Dyson Sphere.
Is that Planet of Judgment or is that the other one?
World Without End.
World Without End. I could not find that book.
I tore my library up trying to find it.
I like doing the technical part of that.
It's not a Dyson Sphere, so well, it is a hollowed out asteroid.
Burnale Sphere is a more proper name for it.
But I tried to work out this alien science.
I've got a notebook full of stuff about how flying aliens would build their cities.
That part was fun enough. I had to amuse myself sometime.
Off the cuff question here.
Anybody ever consider them for possible Star Trek episodes?
Well, unfortunately, I have no say in that they're quite free to take them without asking me or paying me.
It's part of the contract of Paramount.
Oh, how wonderful of Paramount.
As to your writing itself, how do you go about constructing your novels?
Do you come up with an idea for the novel characters and then work them into a particular setting or what?
Well, the most consistent pattern they have is working out the actual structure, the way time is handled in the novel.
It sounds rather dry, but I don't like to outline the story in any detail, because then there are no surprises.
So I start out with the structure, how the viewpoint is handled and so forth.
I start working and modify the structure as the story builds.
Usually I have some vague idea of how it's going to end that becomes less vague as the novel progresses.
Short stories I normally start with the characters who seem interesting and make them do something.
In other words, you set up sort of a lettuce work and then you let the story build itself on that.
That seems to work better for me.
Although often the structure does have to be modified halfway through, I don't want to be hit into a procrastin bed by it.
I want to ask some questions about worlds, but this is going to be a neat trick because I haven't read it yet.
Let me get back to the material. It's coming out in March.
From Viking and Hardcover. Do you have a paper contract out on it yet?
No, it's going to auction in December.
You've had pretty good luck with going from Hardcover to Paper, haven't you?
Yeah, so far I have. The reason for doing it is to maintain a high level of critical attention for the books.
These books that are sold as paperback originals don't get reviewed in the right places.
Because you do get more money up front of course doing a paperback deal.
But it seems to have worked in my case to go with the traditional route.
Let's go ahead and keep tape rolling.
What is worlds about? It's a first part of a trilogy.
What's happening in Joe Haldeman's world in worlds?
It starts out about a century from now.
It's essentially the story of a woman who was born and grew up on a space colony.
A space settlement. It is sent to Earth for a year of postgraduate work.
Finishing, if you want to call it that.
Being set up for a political position as it is on between this world and Earth.
And various strange things happened to her in the year that she's here.
It's sort of a old, deltonable novel.
She grows by being sort of bounced around by Earth.
And the second novel, Stars, takes over for the first one in and takes her into old age.
Will all three novels be following this one character?
No, she dies in the second one. I think. I haven't finished the second one yet.
That's an interesting way of writing. You discover it as you write it.
Yeah, that's for me. Some people have to outline very meticulously.
But when I do that, I lose interest in it.
Yeah, you already know what's going to happen.
Yeah, it's just tight.
Right.
What did...
Come on, Dave, phrase the question.
What made you decide to put together a trilogy rather than just like one novel?
Well, it seems like an awfully big thing to put into one book.
And it looks as if each one of the trilogy, each volume of the trilogy,
will be longer than any other book that ever written by us, at least a third.
Each one, so indeed, would have done, well, nearly a half million words long.
So, I had to get the code to sell.
And I just, you know, everybody's doing trilogy, so I can't do a trilogy too.
It's part of it. They're a very successful second and third books have built in audience.
Also, I wanted to try something big.
Half a million words is pretty big.
Yeah.
I was stifling laughs there when you were talking about everybody's written trilogies.
Lots of science fiction trilogies too.
Yeah, so it's almost a sub-genre actually.
And now there are four and five books actually.
Gene Wolf's Torture series, at least under five audience.
But there's no end to it.
Of course, there's a Farm Reserve or Boat series. It just goes on and on and on.
Yeah.
Do you imagine in this trilogy you will have constructed sort of a future history?
Yeah, it turns out that way.
Yeah. Do you think you might follow it up with later novels or that just further on down the line?
No, the third one in the third volume, God's, covers about a million years I think.
So there's not much point in thinking about a fourth one.
In other words, you take it far into the future.
Yeah.
I wanted to try a staple Donnie and kind of novel.
It'll be the most difficult one, I think.
Taking it that far into the future, the possibilities are just about limitless.
Yeah.
And it will probably be optimistic.
The first book is not too optimistic because it's dystopian, I think.
Yeah, Jack Williamson says that most science fiction works, in fact, a lot of mainstream things,
are divided between either utopian or dystopian viewpoints.
Well, the point is neither one is mutually exclusive.
It's possible they have a complex enough vision of the future that we can see alternation, utopia and dystopia.
That's another good thing about having a scoped canvas of a trilogy.
Yeah, it would allow you to cover a lot of areas.
Yeah.
And I can run what I'm doing in both the first and the second is describing two cultures being able to switch from chapter to chapter
and use one to illuminate the other.
And in fact, one is a utopia and one is dystopia.
Okay, I've covered all my questions that I have down here, plus a couple I made up as I went along.
Darrell, is there anything that you would like?
Oh, yeah, okay.
Do you have any authors that you really enjoy reading, science fiction in particular?
Well, it varies a lot.
I guess Gene Mulf is my favorite writer right now.
I like Roger Sophanesney very much.
Actually, I'm reading the number of the beast right now.
The timeline is an old favorite, but I've not been too happy about it lately, folks.
The number of the beast is turning out to be rather more entertaining than I thought it would be.
Let me see.
I like Silverberg and Le Guin.
It's quite a bit of chip delaney, similar to Laney.
Oh, Fred Paul is doing marvelous work now.
The problem is I don't read too much science fiction.
I read something after 16 people have read about it, and I finally go pick it up.
Or 16 people hated it, and I want to find out why.
Good reasons for both.
Oh, yeah, that covers about what we wanted to do.
Any loose ends on your end?
No.
Okay, we're shutting down the tape.